# 2026-07-21 and 2026-07-23

## Ownership

### What Is Ownership?

Ownership is a set of rules that govern how a Rust program manages memory. All programs have to manage the way they use a computer’s memory while running. Some languages have garbage collection that regularly looks for no-longer-used memory as the program runs; in other languages, the programmer must explicitly allocate and free the memory. **Rust uses a third approach: Memory is managed through a system of ownership with a set of rules that the compiler checks**. If any of the rules are violated, **the program won’t compile**. None of the features of ownership will slow down your program while it’s running.

#### The Stack and the Heap

> whether a value is on the stack or the heap affects how the language behaves and why you have to make certain decisions

The stack uses LIFO.

The heap: The memory allocator finds an empty spot in the heap that is big enough, marks it as being in use, and returns a pointer, which is the address of that location, Because the pointer to the heap is a known, fixed size, you can store the pointer on the stack, but when you want the actual data, you must follow the pointer

Pushing to the stack is faster than allocating on the heap because the allocator never has to search for a place to store new data; that location is always at the top of the stack. Comparatively, allocating space on the heap requires more work because the allocator must first find a big enough space to hold the data and then perform bookkeeping to prepare for the next allocation.

When your code calls a function, the values passed into the function (including, potentially, pointers to data on the heap) and the function’s local variables get pushed onto the stack. When the function is over, those values get popped off the stack.

#### Ownership Rules

First, let’s take a look at the ownership rules. Keep these rules in mind as we work through the examples that illustrate them:
- Each value in Rust has an owner.
- There can only be one owner at a time.
- When the owner goes out of scope, the value will be dropped.

#### Variable scope

```rust
    {                      // s is not valid here, since it's not yet declared
        let s = "hello";   // s is valid from this point forward

        // do stuff with s
    }                      // this scope is now over, and s is no longer valid
```

#### The `String` Type

> ```rust
> let s = String::from("hello");
> ```
> The double colon `::` operator allows us to namespace this particular `from` function under the `String` type rather than using some sort of name like `string_from`.

This kind of string can be mutated:

    ```rust
    let mut s = String::from("hello");

    s.push_str(", world!"); // push_str() appends a literal to a String

    println!("{s}"); // this will print `hello, world!`
    ```

So, what’s the difference here? Why can `String` be mutated but literals cannot? The difference is in how these two types deal with memory.

#### Memory and Allocation

With the `String` type, in order to support a mutable, growable piece of text, we need to allocate an amount of memory on the heap, **unknown at compile time**, to hold the contents. This means:
- The memory must be requested from the memory allocator at runtime.
- We need a way of returning this memory to the allocator when we’re done with our String.
That first part is done by us: When we call `String::from`, its implementation requests the memory it needs. This is pretty much universal in programming languages.

Rust takes a different path: The memory is automatically returned once the variable that owns it goes out of scope. Here’s a version of our scope example from Listing 4-1 using a String instead of a string literal:

    ```rust
    {
        let s = String::from("hello"); // s is valid from this point forward

        // do stuff with s
    }                                  // this scope is now over, and s is no
                                        // longer valid
    ```

There is a natural point at which we can return the memory our `String` needs to the allocator: when `s` goes out of scope. When a variable goes out of scope, Rust calls a special function for us. This function is called `drop`, and it’s where the author of `String` can put the code to return the memory. Rust calls `drop` automatically at the closing curly bracket.

##### Variables and Data Interacting with Move

When `s2` and `s1` go out of scope, they will both try to free the same memory. This is known as a double free error and is one of the memory safety bugs we mentioned previously. Freeing memory twice can lead to memory corruption, which can potentially lead to security vulnerabilities.

To ensure memory safety, after the line let `s2` = `s1`;, Rust considers `s1` as no longer valid. Therefore, Rust doesn’t need to free anything when s1 goes out of scope. Check out what happens when you try to use s1 after `s2` is created; it won’t work:

    ```rust
    let s1 = String::from("hello");
    let s2 = s1;

    println!("{s1}, world!"); // this won't work
    ```

If you’ve heard the terms *shallow copy* and *deep copy* while working with other languages, the concept of copying the pointer, length, and capacity without copying the data probably sounds like making a *shallow copy*. But because Rust also invalidates the first variable, instead of being called a *shallow copy*, it’s known as a move. In this example, we would say that `s1` was moved into `s2`.

Deep copy:

    ```rust
    let s1 = String::from("hello");
    let s2 = s1.clone();

    println!("s1 = {s1}, s2 = {s2}");
    ```

Here are some of the types that implement Copy:

- All the integer types, such as `u32`.
- The Boolean type, `bool`, with values `true` and `false`.
- All the floating-point types, such as `f64`.
- The character type, `char`.
- Tuples, if they only contain types that also implement `Copy`. For example, (`i32`, `i32`) implements `Copy`, but (`i32`, `String`) does not.

#### Ownership and Functions

The mechanics of passing a value to a function are similar to those when assigning a value to a variable. Passing a variable to a function will move or copy, just as assignment does. Listing 4-3 has an example with some annotations showing where variables go into and out of scope.

    ```rust
    fn main() {
        let s = String::from("hello");  // s comes into scope

        takes_ownership(s);             // s's value moves into the function...
                                        // ... and so is no longer valid here

        let x = 5;                      // x comes into scope

        makes_copy(x);                  // Because i32 implements the Copy trait,
                                        // x does NOT move into the function,
                                        // so it's okay to use x afterward.

    } // Here, x goes out of scope, then s. However, because s's value was moved,
    // nothing special happens.

    fn takes_ownership(some_string: String) { // some_string comes into scope
        println!("{some_string}");
    } // Here, some_string goes out of scope and `drop` is called. The backing
    // memory is freed.

    fn makes_copy(some_integer: i32) { // some_integer comes into scope
        println!("{some_integer}");
    } // Here, some_integer goes out of scope. Nothing special happens.
    ```

#### Return Values and Scope

Returning values can also transfer ownership

```rust
fn main() {
    let s1 = gives_ownership();        // gives_ownership moves its return
                                       // value into s1

    let s2 = String::from("hello");    // s2 comes into scope

    let s3 = takes_and_gives_back(s2); // s2 is moved into
                                       // takes_and_gives_back, which also
                                       // moves its return value into s3
} // Here, s3 goes out of scope and is dropped. s2 was moved, so nothing
  // happens. s1 goes out of scope and is dropped.

fn gives_ownership() -> String {       // gives_ownership will move its
                                       // return value into the function
                                       // that calls it

    let some_string = String::from("yours"); // some_string comes into scope

    some_string                        // some_string is returned and
                                       // moves out to the calling
                                       // function
}

// This function takes a String and returns a String.
fn takes_and_gives_back(a_string: String) -> String {
    // a_string comes into
    // scope

    a_string  // a_string is returned and moves out to the calling function
}
```