# 2026-07-21

## Ownership

### What Is Ownership?

Ownership is a set of rules that govern how a Rust program manages memory. All programs have to manage the way they use a computer’s memory while running. Some languages have garbage collection that regularly looks for no-longer-used memory as the program runs; in other languages, the programmer must explicitly allocate and free the memory. **Rust uses a third approach: Memory is managed through a system of ownership with a set of rules that the compiler checks**. If any of the rules are violated, **the program won’t compile**. None of the features of ownership will slow down your program while it’s running.

#### The Stack and the Heap

> whether a value is on the stack or the heap affects how the language behaves and why you have to make certain decisions

The stack uses LIFO.

The heap: The memory allocator finds an empty spot in the heap that is big enough, marks it as being in use, and returns a pointer, which is the address of that location, Because the pointer to the heap is a known, fixed size, you can store the pointer on the stack, but when you want the actual data, you must follow the pointer

Pushing to the stack is faster than allocating on the heap because the allocator never has to search for a place to store new data; that location is always at the top of the stack. Comparatively, allocating space on the heap requires more work because the allocator must first find a big enough space to hold the data and then perform bookkeeping to prepare for the next allocation.

When your code calls a function, the values passed into the function (including, potentially, pointers to data on the heap) and the function’s local variables get pushed onto the stack. When the function is over, those values get popped off the stack.

#### Ownership Rules

First, let’s take a look at the ownership rules. Keep these rules in mind as we work through the examples that illustrate them:
- Each value in Rust has an owner.
- There can only be one owner at a time.
- When the owner goes out of scope, the value will be dropped.

#### Variable scope

```rust
    {                      // s is not valid here, since it's not yet declared
        let s = "hello";   // s is valid from this point forward

        // do stuff with s
    }                      // this scope is now over, and s is no longer valid
```

#### The `String` Type

> ```rust
> let s = String::from("hello");
> ```
> The double colon `::` operator allows us to namespace this particular `from` function under the `String` type rather than using some sort of name like `string_from`.

This kind of string can be mutated:

    ```rust
    let mut s = String::from("hello");

    s.push_str(", world!"); // push_str() appends a literal to a String

    println!("{s}"); // this will print `hello, world!`
    ```

So, what’s the difference here? Why can `String` be mutated but literals cannot? The difference is in how these two types deal with memory.

#### Memory and Allocation